class-slides/class-materials/week-2/module-5/instructions.md, before:

# Halfway Hackathon

**Congratulations!** Today we are at the halfway point in our class. Let's celebrate with a hackathon! A hackathon is a great opportunity to work on a larger, real-world project, while reviewing and solidifying the core concepts that we've covered in the first half of the course.

## Step 1: Make a Plan

1. Take a few minutes to brainstorm some project ideas related to your community site. What are some features that users might find useful, for a variety of different communities?
2. Some examples might include: a basic forum (with "admin" and "user" access), a community theme customizer, or a custom photo gallery plugin.
3. Review the Step 3: Coding section below to consider the different concepts that we hope to practice during this project.
4. In your group, hold a standup meeting to present your plan of what you'd like to accomplish, and potential stumbling blocks.
5. If someone mentions being concerned about a concept that you feel solid on, offer to be a resource for them if they have questions.

------

## Step 2: Set up a GitHub repo

1. If you haven't already, open the **Terminal** and run:
```
git config --global user.name "YOUR NAME"
git config --global user.email "YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS"
```

2. Go to [GitHub](https://github.com/) and sign in or sign up for an account.
3. Create a new repository on GitHub by clicking the new repository menu, upper-right.
4. Follow the instructions presented in the new repository.

>If you'd like to know more about the philosophy behind version control, check out The Git Parable

-----

## Step 3: Coding

The following lists the core web development skills that you should feel comfortable using in your project thus far:

1. Using Markdown to create a README.md file introducing your project.
2. Pushing to GitHub and seeing it rendered on your repository's main page.
3. Creating an HTML document using the following HTML tags:
  + `<html>`, `<head>`, `<title>`, `<body>`
  + header and paragraph tags
  + bold and italic tags
  + `<div>` and `<span>`
  + ordered and unordered lists
  + images and links
  + horizontal rule and line break
4. Using a style attribute on an HTML element, then a `<style>` tag in the head, then a `<link>` tag to a separate `.css` document to include CSS styles in your page. Try to use the following CSS properties at a minimum:
  + `color, background-color, background-image`
  + `font-size, font-family`
  + `height, width, max-width`
  + `margin, padding, border, border-radius`
5. Refactoring your code to use classes and ids.
6. Using some complex CSS selectors, like descendent selectors
7. Using an `iframe` to embed videos or maps on your page
8. Using `float` and and `position:fixed` to position some elements
9. Creating an HTML form incorporating various inputs (`text, password, email, textarea, radio, checkbox, select menu, submit`, etc)
10. Making your form live using Formspree
11. Using the Bootstrap grid system to lay out your page
12. Using some pre-written Bootstrap CSS classes on various elements of your page
13. Using `alert()`, `prompt()`, and `console.log()` where appropriate
14. Setting and retrieving values from JavaScript variables
15. Using `document.querySelector()` in conjunction with `.textContent` and `.innerHTML` to retrieve and place content on the page
16. Using `if`, `elseif` and `else` to implement branching logic on the basis of comparing variables and values
17. Using logical and (`&&`), logical or (`||`), and the ternary operator
18. Using `while` loops to do work multiple times until a condition is met
19. Using the `Math` object and `parseInt()`.
20. Using jQuery to select existing HTML elements on the page
21. Use jQuery's `.css()`, `.attr()`, `.text()`, `.html()`, `.append()`, and `.val()` to both get and set values
22. Use some jQuery effects like `.show()`, `.slideDown()` and `.fadeOut()`
23. Create user interaction through events, either through `.addEventListener` or jQuery's `.on()`.

#### Stretch Goals:

1. Use some of Bootstrap's JavaScript utilities
2. Try incorporating some jQuery Plug-ins

------------

## Step 4: Deploy & Promote

1. Deploy your code to Firebase
2. Post a link on Slack
3. Send it to your friends and family members so they can be proud of you
4. Social media?

----------

## Step 5: Profit?

+ Monetize
+ Monetize
+ Monetize

-------

## A note regarding best practices:

Try to decipher the code below. What does it do?

```javascript
var i = 1, n = 5, j
while (i <= n){
j = 1;
var msg = '';
if (i === 1) {
msg += 'Welcome ' + i;
} else if (i > 1) {
msg += 'Welcome ' + i + ', meet';
}
while (j < n) {
if( j > 0 && j < i) {
if (j === i - 1) {
if (j === 1) {
msg += ' ' + j;
} else {
msg += ' and ' + j;
}
} else {
if (j === 1 && i === 3){
msg += ' ' + j;
} else {
msg += ' ' + j +',';
}
}
}
console.log(msg)
j++;
}
```
Pretty tough right? Here are some problems:

+ No indentation
+ Obscure variable names
+ A bit verbose

What happens when we clean it up?

```javascript
var guest_number, announcement_message, arrival_number = 1, total_number_of_guests = 5

while (arrival_number <= total_number_of_guests){
  guest_number = 1, announcement_message = 'Welcome ' + arrival_number

  if (arrival_number > 1) {
    announcement_message += ', meet ' + guest_number

    while (++guest_number < arrival_number ) {
      if (guest_number !== arrival_number - 1) {
        announcement_message += ', ' + guest_number
      } else {
        announcement_message += ' and ' + guest_number
      }
    }
  }
  arrival_number++
  console.log(announcement_message)
}
```
### Go and build something, with pretty code!

Commit message:

Final update before halfway hack-a-thon

class-slides/class-materials/week-2/module-5/instructions.md, after:

# Halfway Hackathon

**Congratulations!** Today we are at the halfway point in our class. Let's celebrate with a hackathon! A hackathon is a great opportunity to work on a larger, real-world project, while reviewing and solidifying the core concepts that we've covered in the first half of the course.

## Step 1: Make a Plan

1. Take a few minutes to brainstorm some project ideas related to your community site. What are some features that users might find useful, for a variety of different communities?
2. Some examples might include: a basic forum (with "admin" and "user" access), a community theme customizer, or a custom photo gallery plugin.
3. Review the Step 3: Coding section below to consider the different concepts that we hope to practice during this project.
4. In your group, hold a standup meeting to present your plan of what you'd like to accomplish, and potential stumbling blocks.
5. If someone mentions being concerned about a concept that you feel solid on, offer to be a resource for them if they have questions.

------

## Step 2: Set up a GitHub repo

1. If you haven't already, open the **Terminal** and run:
```
git config --global user.name "YOUR NAME"
git config --global user.email "YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS"
```

2. Make sure that your [GitHub](https://github.com/) account is up-and-running.
3. Fork the boilerplate code for your team to your own account (ask your instructor for links).
4. Clone your forked copy of your team's codebase to your own machine from the **Terminal**. An example:
```
git clone https://github.com/NAlexPear/savvy.git

```
5. Add your name to the end of `<div #copyright>` at the bottom of the boilerplate page;
6. Stage, commit, and push your changes to your repository on GitHub with the following commands:
```
git add -A
git commit -m "Commit Message"
git push origin master
```
7. Create a pull request to the ORIGINAL repository (managed by your instructor) through GitHub.
8. Make sure that your pull request describes the changes that you made in the last update!
9. While your instructor merges all changes, set up the ORIGINAL (not forked copy) repository as a remote with the following commands:
```
git remote add mothership [url of original repo]
git remote -v 
```
10. Once all changes have been merged by your instructor, fetch the new version of the codebase from the ORIGINAL repo (not your personal fork), update your local files, and update your personal fork of the original repo using the following commands:
```
git fetch --all
git reset --hard mothership/master
git push -f origin master
```
11. And there you have it! It's now time to work on the next feature! (And please keep your changes MODULAR).

>If you'd like to know more about the philosophy behind version control, check out The Git Parable

-----

## Step 3: Coding

The following lists the core web development skills that you should feel comfortable using in your project thus far:

1. Using Markdown to create a README.md file introducing your project.
2. Pushing to GitHub and seeing it rendered on your repository's main page.
3. Creating an HTML document using the following HTML tags:
  + `<html>`, `<head>`, `<title>`, `<body>`
  + header and paragraph tags
  + bold and italic tags
  + `<div>` and `<span>`
  + ordered and unordered lists
  + images and links
  + horizontal rule and line break
4. Using a style attribute on an HTML element, then a `<style>` tag in the head, then a `<link>` tag to a separate `.css` document to include CSS styles in your page. Try to use the following CSS properties at a minimum:
  + `color, background-color, background-image`
  + `font-size, font-family`
  + `height, width, max-width`
  + `margin, padding, border, border-radius`
5. Refactoring your code to use classes and ids.
6. Using some complex CSS selectors, like descendent selectors
7. Using an `iframe` to embed videos or maps on your page
8. Using `float` and and `position:fixed` to position some elements
9. Creating an HTML form incorporating various inputs (`text, password, email, textarea, radio, checkbox, select menu, submit`, etc)
10. Making your form live using Formspree
11. Using the Bootstrap grid system to lay out your page
12. Using some pre-written Bootstrap CSS classes on various elements of your page
13. Using `alert()`, `prompt()`, and `console.log()` where appropriate
14. Setting and retrieving values from JavaScript variables
15. Using `document.querySelector()` in conjunction with `.textContent` and `.innerHTML` to retrieve and place content on the page
16. Using `if`, `elseif` and `else` to implement branching logic on the basis of comparing variables and values
17. Using logical and (`&&`), logical or (`||`), and the ternary operator
18. Using `while` loops to do work multiple times until a condition is met
19. Using the `Math` object and `parseInt()`.
20. Using jQuery to select existing HTML elements on the page
21. Use jQuery's `.css()`, `.attr()`, `.text()`, `.html()`, `.append()`, and `.val()` to both get and set values
22. Use some jQuery effects like `.show()`, `.slideDown()` and `.fadeOut()`
23. Create user interaction through events, either through `.addEventListener` or jQuery's `.on()`.

#### Stretch Goals:

1. Use some of Bootstrap's JavaScript utilities
2. Try incorporating some jQuery Plug-ins

------------

## Step 4: Deploy & Promote

1. Deploy your code to Firebase
2. Post a link on Slack
3. Send it to your friends and family members so they can be proud of you
4. Social media?

----------

## Step 5: Profit?

+ Monetize
+ Monetize
+ Monetize

-------

## A note regarding best practices:

Try to decipher the code below. What does it do?

```javascript
var i = 1, n = 5, j
while (i <= n){
j = 1;
var msg = '';
if (i === 1) {
msg += 'Welcome ' + i;
} else if (i > 1) {
msg += 'Welcome ' + i + ', meet';
}
while (j < n) {
if( j > 0 && j < i) {
if (j === i - 1) {
if (j === 1) {
msg += ' ' + j;
} else {
msg += ' and ' + j;
}
} else {
if (j === 1 && i === 3){
msg += ' ' + j;
} else {
msg += ' ' + j +',';
}
}
}
console.log(msg)
j++;
}
```
Pretty tough right? Here are some problems:

+ No indentation
+ Obscure variable names
+ A bit verbose

What happens when we clean it up?

```javascript
var guest_number, announcement_message, arrival_number = 1, total_number_of_guests = 5

while (arrival_number <= total_number_of_guests){
  guest_number = 1, announcement_message = 'Welcome ' + arrival_number

  if (arrival_number > 1) {
    announcement_message += ', meet ' + guest_number

    while (++guest_number < arrival_number ) {
      if (guest_number !== arrival_number - 1) {
        announcement_message += ', ' + guest_number
      } else {
        announcement_message += ' and ' + guest_number
      }
    }
  }
  arrival_number++
  console.log(announcement_message)
}
```
### Go and build something, with pretty code!
